# 1. General presentation

## 1.1. SpatGRIS is a spatialization tool

*SpatGRIS* does spatialization and localization. The spatialization
gives the listener the impression of being surrounded by the sound. It’s
an immersive experience. The localization is a way to place a sound at a
very precise place in the space. The two concepts can be used at the
same time in *SpatGRIS*.

### 1.1.1. Spatialization 

Using its two algorithms DOME or CUBE, *SpatGRIS* maps the sources —
which come from any audio software — to a speaker setup. The position of
the sources is provided by OSC messages. The spatialization is done
through a speaker system in a physical space.

### 1.1.2. Localization 

With the Direct Outputs options (independent or spatialized), *SpatGRIS*
makes it possible to access directly to the speakers, for example to
manage subwoofers, to place a sound on a particular speaker or to use a
channel-based approach to spatialization.

## 1.2. SpatGRIS is a recorder and a player

*SpatGRIS* allows recording the speaker outputs in spatialized modes
(DOME or CUBE) or two-channel modes (STEREO or BINAURAL) under two
standards - WAV, AIFF - and two formats - Mono Files or Interleaved.
With the PLAYER tool, *SpatGRIS* can play any multichannel works
recorded with it.

## 1.3. SpatGRIS makes speaker setups 

The speaker setup can adopt the form of a DOME or the free form of a
virtual CUBE.

### 1.3.1. DOME speaker setups

In the DOME, the distance between every speaker and the centre of the
DOME is fixed. Sound sources can be spatialized on the surface of the
DOME.

### 1.3.2 CUBE speaker setups

In the CUBE, speakers can be freely arranged in space. There is no fixed
distance between the speakers and the centre of the setup. Unlike DOME
setups, sound sources can enter, pass through, and exit the setup. Sound
sources that are outside the setup can be treated with attenuation
parameters (volume and filter).

## 1.4. The speakers can be part of the spatialization and the localization

Each loudspeaker has a unique number — whether in spatialized mode or as
a direct output — and can be used for these two functions:
spatialization and localization, thanks to the new direct output
functions. A speaker can be part of the spatialization and at the same
time be a direct output. This is a major conceptual difference compared
to previous version.

## 1.5. The three components of SpatGRIS

There are three components in *SpatGRIS* that are saved independently:
Project, Speaker Setup and Settings.

• Save Project. A project is coupled with a work and contains a certain
number of sources.

• Save Speaker Setup. A speaker setup is coupled with a physical
installation placed in a space.

• Save Settings. User settings are linked to a workstation (computer and
audio interface), including the stereo outputs used for stereo
reduction.

## 1.6. What’s new and improved in ControlGRIS/SpatGRIS?

• *SpatGRIS* is independent from any audio virtual device, either *Jack,
Enzian* or *BlackHole*. It’s the user’s choice.

• Direct Outs now have two functions: Independent, for speakers that are
not part of the spatialization, e.g. subwoofers; Spatialized, through
which the sound can be sent directly to any speaker that is part of the
speaker setup.

• Compatibility with the newest version of MacOS, from 10.15 (Catalina)
to 14.7 (Sonoma) and new machines (M1-M2-M3).

• ProTools compatibility with the addition of the *ControlGRIS* AAX
format*.*

• STEREO and BINAURAL can be assigned to any outputs of the sound card.

• Several speaker setups and projects templates are now integrated in
the software.

• *ControlGRIS* and *SpatGRIS* are available for Windows.

**What’s new:**

***SpatGRIS***

• Version 3.3.7

\- A general MUTE button has been added.

• Recent additions and patches

\- SpeakerView: Keep speaker numbers up-to-date

\- The 3D window representing speakers and sources is now independent of
*SpatGRIS*. The graphical representation is now done in *SpeakerView*,
with a much-improved graphical interface.

\- *SpatGRIS* and *BlackHole* are now 256 channels each.

\- CUBE Mode: Attenuation settings have a Bypass toggle button.

\- CUBE Mode: negative Z attenuation begins at the floor.

\- Stereo Reduction: Attenuation settings is functional in Stereo
reduction when in Cube or Hybrid mode.

\- Attenuation settings: They are saved with the projects.

\- Introduction of the PLAYER, a tool which allows *SpatGRIS* to be used
as a standalone software to play any piece recorded by it to any speaker
setup.

\- CUBE mode uses a new algorithm: MBAP (Matrix Based Amplitude
Panning).

\- Speaker Setup Edition in CUBE and HYBRID modes: added a Global Sound
Diffusion parameter.

\- Introduces theHYBRID mode that combines the DOME and the CUBE
algorithms.

\- Show numbers has been split into Show Source Numbers and Show Speaker
Numbers.

***ControlGRIS***

• Version 1.4.5

\- Fixes different issues with the Windows installer

\- Provides the possibility to place signals outside the CUBE on the Z
axis.

**Improvements and Fixes**

• The Speaker Setup Edition has been greatly optimized.

• Better compatibility in the parameters between *ControlGRIS* and
*SpatGRIS.*

• A lot of very practical enhancements and changes in the terminology!

## 1.7. Groupe de Recherche en Immersion Spatiale (GRIS)

Director: Robert Normandeau.

Main programmer: Gaël Lane Lépine.

Consultant: Devin Roth, creator of BlackHole.

Assistant.es: Nicola Giannini.

Former programmers: Samuel Béland, Olivier Bélanger, Vincent Berthiaume.

Former assistants: Simone d’Ambrosio, Theo Mathien, Raphaël
Néron-Baribeau, Ofer Pelz, Dominic Thibault, Alexis Langevin-Tétrault,
Vincent Monastesse, David Ledoux, Yohan Brimicombe, Christophe Lengelé,
Mélanie Frisoli, David Piazza, Gabrielle Caux..

Former trainees: Ludovic Laffineur, Antoine Landrieu, Nicolas Masson,
Hicheme Ben Gaied.

The GRIS received research grants from Hexagram, SSHRC and FRQSC since
2008 and up to 2025.

Thanks to Yohan Brimicombe for the creation of the web site:
<http://gris.musique.umontreal.ca>

