# 10. Tips and Tricks

In addition to the normal use of SpatGRIS for programming the
spatialization of sound from a wide variety of sources, here are a few
examples of other uses that might not immediately spring to mind. Over
the years, these uses have emerged through the inventive practices of
our users.

## 10.1. Acousmatic spatialisation

It is perfectly possible to use SpatGRIS in the context of traditional
acousmatic spatialization, where a stereophonic source is multiplied
over as many pairs of loudspeakers in the concert hall. We have used it
in this way for years during the weekly concerts in the History of
Electro Music course.

### 10.1.1. Mixing console

To achieve spatialization in an acousmatic context, you need a mixing
console with Ethernet transmission (ideal, like an AVID S1 or an
Euphonix) or MIDI (slower, like a Mackie Control or a Behringer).

### 10.1.2. Digital Audio Workstation

In the DAW of your choice (DP, Logic, Live, Nuendo, Reaper, etc.), you
place the stereo audio file on the first stereo track, on which you also
place a ControlGRIS plug-in. You then multiply copies of this first
stereo track on as many additional copies as your spatialization
scenario requires. It's also possible to have just one audio track and
as many auxiliary outputs as you need, if your SAN allows. Each track
and each instance of ControlGRIS will be assigned consecutive numbers.
It's important to mention here that we're not talking about one
potentiometer = one loudspeaker. Each loudspeaker can be used for
several **spatialization** scenarios

### 10.1.3. Acousmatic setup

Let's use the Dome24(8-5x2-6)Subs2 Acousmonium setup present in the
SpatGRIS Templates. This consists of:

• 1 octophonic, from 1 to 8

• 1 asymmetric pair on the left 9-10 (direct outputs)

• 1 central solo pair 11-12 (direct outputs)

• 1 main stereo pair 13-14 (direct outputs)

• 1 pair centre-right asymmetric 15-16 (direct outputs)

• 1 asymmetric pair on the left 17-18 (direct outputs)

• 1 hexaphonic group 19 to 24

• 1 pair of subwoofers 25-26 (direct outputs)

<img src="/media-en/media/image137.jpg"
style="width:3.13643in;height:2.8in" />

### 10.1.4. Scenario

The first scenario would involve assigning each potentiometer to a
loudspeaker group in the order mentioned above. This requires 8
potentiometers, as there are 8 loudspeaker groups. Direct outputs do not
need ControlGRIS.

• Potentiometer 1: ControlGRIS 1-2, BlackHole audio outputs 1-2,
Left-Right position, Azimuth Span at 50%.

<img src="/media-en/media/image138.jpg"
style="width:1.63309in;height:2in" />

In this way, the stereo source is fully distributed over the 8 hp of the
octophonic group.

The left channel on the odd-numbered speakers (in pale turquoise) and
the right channel on the even-numbered speakers (in darker turquoise):

<img src="/media-en/media/image139.jpg"
style="width:3.80385in;height:3in" />

• Potentiometer 2: no ControlGRIS, BlackHole outputs 3-4, H-P 9-10
direct outputs in SpatGRIS (in black):

<img src="/media-en/media/image140.jpg"
style="width:0.92099in;height:2in" /><img src="/media-en/media/image141.jpg"
style="width:2.95918in;height:2in" />

• Potentiometer 3: no ControlGRIS, BlackHole outputs 5-6, H-P 11-12
direct outputs in SpatGRIS (in black):

<img src="/media-en/media/image142.jpg"
style="width:0.89686in;height:2in" /><img src="/media-en/media/image143.jpg"
style="width:2.72247in;height:2in" />

• Potentiometer 4: no ControlGRIS, BlackHole outputs 7-8, H-P 13-14
direct outputs in SpatGRIS (in black):

Same scenario

• Potentiometer 5: no ControlGRIS, BlackHole outputs 9-10, H-P 15-16
direct outputs in SpatGRIS (in black):

Same scenario

• Potentiometer 6: no ControlGRIS, BlackHole outputs 11-12, H-P 17-18
direct outputs in SpatGRIS (in black):

Same scenario

• Potentiometer 7: ControlGRIS 13-14, BlackHole outputs 13-14, H-P 19-24
Left-right position, Azimuth Span at 50%, Elevation at top of dome:

<img src="/media-en/media/image144.jpg"
style="width:1.94032in;height:1.8in" /><img src="/media-en/media/image145.jpg"
style="width:1.23699in;height:1.8in" />

The left channel on odd-numbered hp (in light orange) and the right
channel on even-numbered hp (in darker orange):

<img src="/media-en/media/image146.jpg"
style="width:3.65482in;height:2in" />

## 10.2. Using the PLAYER without you being present

The PLAYER (see chapter 6. PLAYER) is a very powerful tool in *SpatGRIS*
which allows you to record a project in the original setup and then play
it in another setup, in a concert hall for example. A typical situation
is when one of your works is played elsewhere in your absence. You can
then record your project using the Record function (see section 5.11.
Recording) by checking the Export Speaker Setup box:

<img src="/media-en/media/image85.jpg"
style="width:4.5in;height:1.17019in" />

The audio files and the original loudspeaker setup will be saved in the
same folder. You can send this one to your destination, who could play
your piece on their own setup. This function is very useful for helping
to spread multichannel music.

## 10.3. HYBRYD mode to vary the trajectories

HYBRID mode (see section 5.7. The HYBRID mode) is actually a DOME in
which sources can be moved in CUBE mode. In exclusive DOME mode, the
sources must be placed on the surface of the dome. This is imposed by
the VBAP algorithm. It is therefore not possible to place a sound inside
or outside the dome. By adopting HYBRID mode, the sources can either
behave in DOME mode or in CUBE mode:

<img src="/media-en/media/image147.jpg"
style="width:4.40323in;height:0.9in" />

As can be seen here, some sources (in burgundy) are located outside the
dome, while others (in light blue) are inside it:

<img src="/media-en/media/image148.jpg"
style="width:6.5in;height:4.23542in" />

HYBRID mode allows you to vary the trajectories in DOME mode.

