# 2. INTRODUCTION

These instructions assume that you are familiar with the following
tools:

• The DAW you use, which must support AU, VST, VST3 or AAX plugins.

• Your audio interface.

## 2.1. Architecture

The *SpatGRIS* system is made of three elements:

• The *ControlGRIS* plugin where the trajectories are designed and
recorded in a DAW (or any OSC device).

• The *SpatGRIS* itself that spatializes the sound, according to the
setup of the speakers done in the Speaker Setup Edition window.

• The virtual audio device *BlackHole*[1] which connects the DAW to
*SpatGRIS*.

The whole architecture, including these elements, looks like this (audio
and OSC are working in parallel):

<img src="/media-en/media/image6.png"
style="width:4.69671in;height:3.15in" />

NOTE: In each track of the DAW, it’s mandatory that the audio output
channel numbers match the OSC source numbers (set by the First Source ID
parameter) in the corresponding ControlGRIS instance to have the sound
to be spatialized in *SpatGRIS*. Failure to do so will lead to silence
or frozen spatialization.

## 2.2. SpatGRIS

*SpatGRIS* is a standalone application that allows the spatialization of
sounds on different speaker configurations, in 2D or 3D. It could be
used with the virtual audio interface *BlackHole* that may provide up to
256 inputs and outputs. The trajectories are sent from the *ControlGRIS*
plugin, or from any other OSC software[2] to *SpatGRIS*. The audio
spatialization itself is performed by *SpatGRIS* and sent to the audio
interface.

### 2.2.1. History

The development of *SpatGRIS* began in 2020. It is a rewritten version
of *ServerGris* (2018) and *SpatGRIS2* (2020). The first official
version of *SpatGRIS* is 3.0.0 and was released in August 2021. It was
our first *Jack*[3] free spatialization tool!

### 2.2.2. System requirements

The software has been tested on the following OS:

• macOS from 10.15 Catalina™ to 14.7 Sonoma™

• It is native on Apple Silicon M1-M2-M3 machine (version 3.1.8 and up).

• Windows™ 10, 11.

### 2.2.3. Installation notes

• Download the latest version of *SpatGRIS* from SourceForge:

[https://sourceforge.net/projects/SpatGRIS3/](https://sourceforge.net/projects/spatgris3/)

*SpatGRIS* for Mac comprises two installers in the same folder:

SpatGRIS_v3:

• *SpatGRIS* itself.

• *SpeakerView* in three versions: Forward (recommended), Compatibility
and Mobile

• *ControlGRIS* as a compressed folder with the different formats of the
plugin.

BlackHole:

• The virtual audio device *BlackHole* that provides 64, 128 or 256
audio channels between the DAW and *SpatGRIS.*

Notes for MacOS users

• *SpatGRIS*, along with *SpeakerView* and a folder of utilities, are
now installed in a GRIS folder (in the Applications folder). It is
possible to rename the GRIS folder (to have multiple installations, for
example), but it is not advisable to rename anything inside this folder.

• To facilitate focus management between *SpeakerView* and *SpatGRIS*,
we recommend that you allow *SpeakerView* to control your computer when
requested. If *SpeakerView* does not request this, go to System Settings
\> Privacy & Security \> Accessibility, and authorize *SpeakerView*.

*SpatGRIS, SpeakerView, ControlGRIS* and *BlackHole* will be updated
separately. Please subscribe to our newsletter to be informed about the
software updates on our web site.

Two external controllers are available for *ControlGRIS*:

• An Open Stage Control patch for iPad™.

• A Lemur patch[4] for iPad™.

An Addendum manual pertaining to these *iPad* controllers is available
on SourceForge.

*SpatGRIS* for Windows has one installer:

• *SpatGRIS* itself.

• *ControlGRIS* as a compressed folder with the different formats of the
plugin.

There is no Windows version of *BlackHole*. For Reaper™ users, there is
the *ReaRoute* function which works similarly to *BlackHole*, but only
for Reaper. It is possible to use *Jack* on Windows[5]. When *BlackHole*
is mentioned in the manual, replace it by *ReaRoute* or *Jack* when
using Windows.

### 2.2.4. Access to the microphone

NOTE: Very important for Catalina (10.15) users and up.

Make sure that *SpatGRIS* has access to the microphone in the System
Preferences, Security & Privacy:

<img src="/media-en/media/image7.jpg"
style="width:1.9711in;height:1.69291in" />

### 2.2.5. BlackHole volume at 0 dB

After installing or reinstalling Blackhole, please make sure that the
volume of BlackHole is at 0 dB in the Audio Midi Setup.

<img src="/media-en/media/image8.jpg"
style="width:5.59231in;height:1.49606in"
alt="A screenshot of a chat Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

### 2.2.6. New Users of BlackHole and macOS 14 Sonoma

NOTE: New users of BlackHole and macOS 14 Sonoma should use the latest
BlackHole installer 0.6.0.

## 2.3. ControlGRIS

*ControlGRIS* is an OSC[6] plugin available in AU, VST, VST3 and AAX
formats (Mac) and VST and AAX formats (Windows). This free and
open-source plugin sends OSC data to *SpatGRIS* to spatialize multiple
sound sources on a variable set of speakers. Different modes of source
links and a trajectory system are provided for spatialization of mono,
stereo and multichannel sources (up to eight channels).

### 2.3.1. History

The development of *ControlGRIS* began in 2019. It was inspired by three
older plugins, *OctoGris* (2010), *ZirkOSC* (2012) and
*SpatGris1*(2017). The first version (1.1.0) was released in April 2020.

### 2.3.2. System requirements

The software has been tested on the following OS and DAWs:

• macOS from 10.15 Catalina™ to 14.7 Sonoma™; Digital Performer™ 10 and
11; Ableton Live™ 10 and 11; Logic Pro™ 10; Reaper™ 6; Pro Tools™
2023.6.

• It is native on Apple Silicon M1-M2-M3 machines (version 1.3.2 and
up).

• Windows™ 10, 11; Reaper™ 6.

### 2.3.3. Installation notes 

Download the latest version of *ControlGRIS* from SourceForge (the
installer is included in the *SpatGRIS* installer):

<https://sourceforge.net/projects/spatgris3/>

Decompress the downloaded file. The different formats will be installed
in their proper location. *ControlGRIS* appears under the “UdeM” folder
of your host application.

### 2.3.4. AU, VST, AAX

Mac versions were intensively tested but the Windows 10 and 11 versions,
not so much!

Comments are welcome.

Here are some particularities:

• Use the AU version in DP and Logic Pro on the Mac.

• Use the VST3 version in Reaper and Live.

• Use the AAX version in ProTools[7].

• Refer to the manual of your preferred DAW to determine which version
is better.

## 2.4. Quick Start Guide

*SpatGRIS* receives Open Sound Control (OSC) data from *ControlGRIS*, to
spatialize the sounds within a set of speakers. The sound itself is sent
from the DAW to *SpatGRIS* via *BlackHole*.

Don't need/want to read the manual? Here are the basic steps to
spatialize a stereo track on a 64-output audio interface.

NOTE: Adjust the Buffer size to the same value in both your DAW and
SpatGRIS. A value of 256 and up is recommended.

1\. Open *SpatGRIS.*

2\. Open the Settings (File menu) or click them directly in the Info bar
and assign the Audio input device to *BlackHole 128ch* and the Audio
output device to your audio interface (you must do that only the first
time). Close the window.

<img src="/media-en/media/image9.jpg"
style="width:1.56193in;height:1.5748in" />

3\. Open a DOME Speaker Setup (File menu) or use the default one.

4\. Open your DAW.

5\. Assign the audio output of your DAW to *BlackHole 128ch.*

6\. Create a stereo track and assign the outputs *to BlackHole 128ch
1-2.*

7\. Insert a *ControlGRIS* plugin on this track and set it to DOME mode.

8\. The number of sources should be already initialized and set at 2 and
First Source ID set at 1.

9\. Select *Circular Fully Fixed* in *Sources Link* and start the
sequencer.

10\. Play with Source No. 1 and see the result in *SpatGRIS.*

11\. The colour of the sources are the ones selected in the Sources (the
red dots in this example).

You are now ready to play and record automation.

<img src="/media-en/media/image10.png"
style="width:5.02968in;height:3.54in" />

<img src="/media-en/media/image11.png"
style="width:4.89639in;height:5.05in" />

NOTE: In each track of the DAW, it’s mandatory that the audio output
numbers match the OSC numbers (set by the First Source ID parameter) in
the corresponding ControlGRIS to have the sound to be spatialized in
SpatGRIS. Not doing that will lead to silence, or to freeze
spatialization.

Questions? Details? Read the manual!

This manual is in the Help menu:

<img src="/media-en/media/image12.jpg"
style="width:1.81222in;height:0.7in" />

###  

