# 3. Connections

## 3.1. Connect the DAW to SpatGRIS 

### 3.1.1. Open SpatGRIS

The first time you open *SpatGRIS*, you'll have to:

• Determine the numbers of sources (up to 256). 64 would be enough in
most cases, but fewer sources mean less CPU load. Or use one of the
projects included in the Templates menu.

• Design a speaker setup or use one in the Templates menu.

After these first two steps, save the Speaker Setup and the Project. At
the next start-up of SpatGRIS, the last saved Speaker Setup and Project
will be loaded.

### 3.1.2. Adjust the output level

By default, the output level of *SpatGRIS* is set to unity gain: 0.00
dB. It may need to be attenuated or increased, especially if it is the
first time you try the system!

### 3.1.3. Assign the DAW to BlackHole

Open your DAW and assign *BlackHole* as the audio output device*.*
*BlackHole* should be detected like any other audio interface in Core
Audio. It is possible to allocate a certain number of active channels
according to the number set in Set Sources (± icon).

<img src="/media-en/media/image13.png"
style="width:4.90635in;height:2.2in" />

### 3.1.4. Multiclient

*SpatGRIS* is a multiclient software, which means that it can connect to
multiple audio software at the same time. Keep in mind, though, that its
primary usage is to spatialize sounds coming out of a single DAW. The
software receives two types of information:

• Audio signals from *BlackHole*

• OSC data from *ControlGRIS*.

Both signals are needed for the sound spatialization. For direct
outputs, only the audio signal is needed.

If you use only one DAW, there is no problem, but it’s mandatory that
the audio output numbers match the OSC numbers (set by First Source ID
parameter) in the corresponding *ControlGRIS* to have the sound to be
spatialized in *SpatGRIS*. Not doing that will lead to silence, or to
freeze spatialization. Things become a little bit more complicated if
you intend to use more than one software at a time.

• *BlackHole* has a limited number of 256 channels in total. If you want
to connect a DAW with 24 channels and another one with 8 channels, keep
in mind that the second DAW will have to be set to channels No. 25-32 in
*BlackHole* andand it will be necessary that ControlGRIS uses the
corresponding OSC numbers.

NOTE: Adjust the Buffer size to the same value in both your DAW and
SpatGRIS. A value of 256 and up is recommended.

## 3.2. Connect ControlGRIS to SpatGRIS

### 3.2.1. Numbering audio and OSC

The spatialization is handled by *SpatGRIS* which receives OSC data from
*ControlGRIS2*. It is mandatory to synchronize *BlackHole* audio output
numbers in the DAW with the OSC numbers in *ControlGRIS2*.

In the following example, three stereo tracks (red, blue, and green) are
assigned to *BlackHole* channel pairs 1-2, 3-4 and 5-6. The three
instances of *ControlGRIS2* use the same OSC numbering: 1-2, 3-4 and
5-6.

<img src="/media-en/media/image14.png"
style="width:4.82117in;height:5.12in" />

To help to keep things clear, it is recommended to use the same colour
scheme in the DAW and in *SpatGRIS*.

<img src="/media-en/media/image15.png"
style="width:4.98084in;height:3.3in" />

NOTE: If by mistake, you are using the same OSC numbers in more than one
ControlGRIS instance, the sources in SpatGRIS will oscillate between
different positions because they will receive two (or more) of the same
position from different *ControlGRIS*. It's a good indicator that
something is wrong.

### 3.2.2. Sources Colour

The colour of the sources can be set to any value by clicking in the
colour square. It opens a window where you can set the parameters of the
colour. This is the colour you will see in the 2D or the 3D window. If
you use a lot of sources, it is recommended that you design your colour
set carefully.

After closing this window, you can set the same colour to the next
source on the right by using right-clicking on a colour. You can set
this way the same colour to a pair of sources or to many contiguous
sources.

<img src="/media-en/media/image16.jpg"
style="width:2.3622in;height:1.9685in" />

