# 6. PLAYER

*SpatGRIS*, starting with version 3.2, introduces a new tool, the
PLAYER, which allows to use *SpatGRIS* as standalone software to play
any piece recorded by *SpatGRIS* with any speaker setup. The main idea
of the PLAYER is to help the diffusion of multichannel works among
different users and on different speaker setups. Works made in DOME
setup can be played in CUBE setup and vice versa. Direct outputs will be
assigned automatically but can be manually adjusted afterwards.

## 6.1. To make a recording for the PLAYER

The procedure for the recording of a piece for playback with the PLAYER
is almost identical to that of a normal recording. The main difference
is that, in addition to recording the audio files themselves, you must
export the coordinates of the used speaker setup by toggling the Export
Speaker Setup function. The audio files and the speaker setup will be
placed in the same folder and must remain there for the PLAYER to work
properly. These coordinates will be used by the PLAYER to correctly
position the sources in any given listening setup.

<img src="/media-en/media/image85.jpg"
style="width:4.5in;height:1.17019in" />

NOTE: Only mono files work with the PLAYER. You'll get an error message
if you try to open an interleaved file. The reason for this is that the
PLAYER uses the output numbers in the name of the audio files for the
spatialization. There is no way to encode this information in an
interleaved sound file.

<img src="/media-en/media/image86.jpg"
style="width:1.47736in;height:1.5in" />

## 6.2. To open and to play a project with the PLAYER

Once the recording is done, you can send the folder that includes the
sound files and the speaker setup to a listener who would use a
different setup. Or you can use it yourself to play the recording on a
different setup.

### 6.2.1. Open the listening speaker setup

Open the speaker setup in *SpatGRIS* on which you intend to listen to
the spatialized work. It could be a custom setup or a setup from the
templates.

### 6.2.2. Open the PLAYER window and load the files

View Menu â€”\> Show Player View

Load the audio files and Speaker Setup folder:

<img src="/media-en/media/image87.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:2.92804in" />

The PLAYER is now showing the basic waveform of the audio files:

<img src="/media-en/media/image88.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:2.92804in" />

The PLAYER will also show the speaker setup with which the work was
recorded. The original speaker locations are shown in red:

<img src="/media-en/media/image89.jpg"
style="width:4.71429in;height:3in" />

Please note that the current project loaded in *SpatGRIS* is being
replaced by the project of the recording.

### 6.2.3. To play the piece

The PLAYER is now ready to play the piece. Just use the Play and Stop
buttons. It's also possible to click anywhere in the soundfile to start
the playback from there.

### 6.2.4. DOME in CUBE or CUBE in DOME

Here's an example of a recording made with a dome setup
(Dome20(8-6-4-2)Subs4) and played within a cube setup
(Cube24(2X12)Subs2). As one can see the shape of the original dome is
well reproduced in the listening cube:

<img src="/media-en/media/image90.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:3in" />

Here is another example showing the opposite situation, a cube recording
(Cube24(3X8)Subs2) played within a dome (Dome20(8-6-4-2)Subs4). As one
can see the shape of the original cube is well reproduced in the
listening dome:

<img src="/media-en/media/image91.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:3in" />

### 6.2.5. Regarding the direct outs in the PLAYER

The PLAYER will try to assign direct outputs to the currently loaded
speaker setup direct outputs.

In the first previous example, the original setup had four direct
outputs (numbers **6-12-18** and **24**). But in the listening setup,
there are only two direct outputs (**25** and **26**). The PLAYER
assigned alternatively the direct output numbers from the original to
the available direct outs of the listening setup. These output numbers
can be manually adjusted afterwards:

<img src="/media-en/media/image92.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:2.87869in" />

## 6.3. To save a PLAYER project

If you have changed any element in the PLAYER project, it could be saved
by using the Save Player Project button. This document will be placed
automatically in the same folder as the audio files and the speaker
setup. The File Saved! button will blink for a while during the process.
All the files should remain in the same folder. The next time you use
the Load audio files and Speaker Setup folder button, everything will be
placed correctly according to the way it was saved.

<img src="/media-en/media/image93.jpg"
style="width:5.5in;height:2.94274in" />

NOTE: A player project remains active until the PLAYER window is open.
When you close it, SpatGRIS switches to its normal input mode, waiting
for audio and OSC to come from either a sequencer or any other software.

