# 9. Known issues and warnings

There are so many different situations and setups that it would be
impossible for us to cover them all. So far, we haven't found any
situation where the system does not work at all. But we have found
situations where some parameters must be adjusted before the system
works properly. Here are a few of them.

## 9.1. Known issues

### 9.1.1. SpatGRIS, Mac version only.

We have a couple of graphical issues with the Apple Silicon machines.

• Issue \#378 (Github): When using the 'Show Speaker Level' function on
M1 and M2, the speakers are not visible unless an audio signal is sent
to them.

• Issue \#344 (Github): Unable to zoom out in the 3D display after a
maximum zoom in, only with Mac M1.

Both these issues are currently under review and should be resolved
soon.

### 9.1.2. ControlGRIS

• The usage of the Back & Forth option leads to many different and
unpredictable behaviours that vary according to the DAW and the kind of
tracks — audio, MIDI, Aux or Instruments — in which *ControlGRIS* is
inserted (Issue \# 94).

• *ControlGRIS* is in an intensive process of refurbishment at the
moment. Stay tuned!

### 9.1.3. SpatGris, the plugin and SpatGRIS, the software

For those who used the plugin *SpatGris1*, you’ll notice that it isn't
working anymore on most recent macOS and on the Apple Silicon machines.
We recommend switching to *ControlGRIS*. The development of *SpatGris*
ended in 2018.

## 9.2. Reaper

### 9.2.1. Mono tracks

• Create a track and insert an instance of *ControlGRIS* and a mono
audio file into it.

• Click on the Route button located to the right of the track gain
adjustment knob.

• In the window that opens, uncheck Master send.

• At the bottom left of this same window, click on the Add new hardware
output…

• At the very bottom of the list of outputs on the output interface are
the individual, mono outputs.

• Select the output that corresponds to the number assigned to the
source in *ControlGRIS*.

There is no need to pan mono sources to the left for odd tracks and to
the right for even tracks, since you don't have to choose the stereo
outputs of Blackhole. Also, currently the Master track in Reaper is
limited to 128 channels, so it is convenient to use the Reaper hardware
outputs directly as described.

### 9.2.2. Device Preferences with Jack

In the Preferences of Reaper, under Audio tab: uncheck *Close audio
device when stopped and application is inactive*. Otherwise, *Jack* will
lose contact with Reaper when it is inactive, and the system will never
work.

<img src="./media-en/media/image136.jpg"
style="width:3in;height:1.98883in" />

## 9.3. Logic Pro

### 9.3.1. Only one Surround output

In Logic Pro, there is only one possible *Surround* instance. This means
that it is not possible to have multiple multichannel tracks in Logic
Pro while using *SpatGRIS*. To avoid this restriction, use only mono and
stereo tracks in Logic Pro.

### 9.3.2. Activate buttons

When using *ControlGRIS* predefined trajectories, there is an exception
about the activate button in Logic Pro. If there is no more audio in the
track at the stop position, the *Activate* buttons will not turn to off.
They will have to be deactivated manually.

## 9.4. Digital Performer 11 and Automated presets

The recorded presets in DP show soft curves instead of the square
expected ones. It means that changing from one automated preset to the
next is very smooth and progressive, where it’s expected to be drastic.
We are working on that.

## 9.5. Using SpatGRIS with live inputs

When using live inputs, we recommend using the Aggregate Device on a
Mac. According to our tests, the system is stable when you create an
aggregate device comprising *BlackHole* and the sound card you're using.
This aggregate device must be designated as the audio input and output
device in your DAW and as the audio input and output device in
*SpatGRIS*.

For channel numbering, please refer to the Audio / Midi Configuration
application on your Mac once you have created your aggregated device. By
placing your physical sound card as the first device element, you won't
need to change the numbering of speaker configurations. This workflow
has been tested with Ableton Live.

For Windows use, using *Jack* seems sufficient, but we haven't tested it
in depth.

NOTE: Adjust the Buffer size to the same value, both in your DAW and
SpatGRIS. A value of 256 and up is recommended.
